README.md, before:

# Plural Bootstrap Repository

This repo defines the core terraform code needed to bootstrap a Plural management cluster and set up your GitOps environment using Plural.  It is intended to be cloned in a users infra repo and then owned by their DevOps team from there.  We do our best to adhere to the standard terraform setup for k8s within the respective cloud, while also installing necessary add-ons as needed (eg load balancer controller and autoscaler for AWS).

> [!TIP]
> If you want a guided walkthrough of how to use your new repo and get started with a Plural-based GitOps workflow, our [how-to guide](https://docs.plural.sh/how-to) is an amazing place to start!


## General Architecture

There are three main resources created by these templates:

* VPC Network to house all resources in the respective cloud
* K8s Control Plane + minimal worker node set
* Postgres DB (will be used for your Plural Console instance)

Our defaults are meant to be tweaked, feel free to reference the documentation of the underlying modules if you want to make a cluster private, or modify our CIDR range defaults if you want to VPC peer.


## Installation repo folder structure

A plural installation repo will have a folder structure like this:

```
helm/ # helm values files
- ${app}.yaml # value overrides
- ${app}-defaults.yaml # default values we generate on install
- *.yaml{.liquid} # `.liquid` extension signifies the helm values file can be templated

bootstrap/ # setup for apps within your cluster fleet, this is the root service-of-services that bootstraps everything recursively

resources/ # additional third party setup manifests for common k8s add-on concerns like observability and policy enforcement.  Can be useful learning resources, but no default setup uses thse

terraform/
  - mgmt # module for setting up your management cluster
  - core-infra # Sets up base networking and dns.  Can also be used for similar cross-cutting infra concerns
  - modules
  - - clusters
  - - - {cloud} # we've crafted some reusable modules for setting up clusters on most major clouds, feel free to use these in stacks or wherever
  - ${app}/ - submodule for individual app's terraform
```

You're free to extend this as you'd like, although if you use the plural marketplace that structure will be expected.  You can also deploy services w/ manifests in other repos, this is meant to serve as a base to define the core infrastructure and get you started in a sane way.

## Using the Plural Catalog

Many of the common operations you'll need to do to manage your kubernetes infrastructure have all been operationalized as part of the service catalog that's synced via `bootstrap/catalogs.yaml`.  A decent example here would be setting up a new kubernetes fleet, which you can do with the following:

1. Go to {your-console-url}/self-service/catalogs, and click the `infra` catalog
2. Chose the `cluster-fleet-creator` pr automation, and fill out the needed values
3. Click create pr after filling out a decent branch name, the generated pr once merged should set up a dev and prod cluster in the networks defined by the core-infra stack we provision by default.

There are also other useful self-service setups in our catalog including:

* data infrastructure - sets up dagster, airbyte, mlflow
* security tooling - trivy operator, opa gatekeeper
* devops tools - elasticsearch log aggregation, victoriametrics based scale-out prometheus, grafana, etc.

## Add a workload cluster to your fleet

There are many ways to set up a workload cluster.  We've given you some baseline terraform to work from in the `terraform/modules/clusters` folders.  You can easily deploy these using stacks documented [here](https://docs.plural.sh/stacks/overview).

We've actually also set this up for you via a PR automation, which you can find at the `/pr/automations` url in your newly created console.  This will trigger a PR with the follownig resources:

* `InfrastructureStack` to create the underlying physical cluster
* `Cluster` to reference that cluster via CRD and enable future crds to point to it for `ServiceDeployment` and so forth.

If you chose to create a cluster using your own automation, adding a cluster can be done simply with the `plural` cli using:

```sh
plural cd clusters boottrap --name {name}
```

or with our terraform provider, which can easily be duplicated by looking at `terraform/modules/clusters/aws/plural.tf`

To reference it in other GitOps resources, add a `Cluster` CRD like:

```yaml
apiVersion: deployments.plural.sh/v1alpha1
kind: Cluster
metadata:
  name: <name>
spec:
  handle: <name> # must be set to reference the cluster
  tags:
    some: tag # if you want to add tags to the cluster
  metadata:
    arbitrary:
      yaml: metadata # any arbitrary metadata you might want to add for service templating (see https://docs.plural.sh/deployments/templating)
```

## Installing Low-Level K8s Operators

Plural provides a number of very useful tools for fleet-wide deployment. If you need to install operators like cert-manager or Istio, we'd recommend using our `GlobalService` resource.  You can find more documentation about [here](https://docs.plural.sh/deployments/operator/global-service).

Here's an example for deploying externaldns:

```yaml
apiVersion: deployments.plural.sh/v1alpha1
kind: GlobalService
metadata:
  name: externaldns
spec:
  tags:
    tier: dev # only target clusters with tier => dev tag pairs
  template:
    namespace: externaldns
    repositoryRef:
      kind: GitRepository
      name: infra
      namespace: infra
    git:
      ref: main
      folder: helm # or wherever else you want to store the helm values
    helm:
      version: 6.31.4
      chart: externaldns
      valuesFiles:
        - externaldns.yaml.liquid # use a liquid extension to enable templating in this file
      repository:
        namespace: infra
        name: externaldns
```

To see a number of working examples, look at your `bootstrap/o11y` or `bootstrap/network` folders, where we should install a few global services for common runtime-level kubernetes concerns.  If you want to reverse our default setup, simply delete them from the repo and push.

Commit message:

update README to clarify purpose of temp directory in gitignore

README.md, after:

# Plural Bootstrap Repository

This repo defines the core terraform code needed to bootstrap a Plural management cluster and set up your GitOps environment using Plural.  It is intended to be cloned in a users infra repo and then owned by their DevOps team from there.  We do our best to adhere to the standard terraform setup for k8s within the respective cloud, while also installing necessary add-ons as needed (eg load balancer controller and autoscaler for AWS).

> [!TIP]
> If you want a guided walkthrough of how to use your new repo and get started with a Plural-based GitOps workflow, our [how-to guide](https://docs.plural.sh/how-to) is an amazing place to start!


## General Architecture

There are three main resources created by these templates:

* VPC Network to house all resources in the respective cloud
* K8s Control Plane + minimal worker node set
* Postgres DB (will be used for your Plural Console instance)

Our defaults are meant to be tweaked, feel free to reference the documentation of the underlying modules if you want to make a cluster private, or modify our CIDR range defaults if you want to VPC peer.


## Installation repo folder structure

A plural installation repo will have a folder structure like this:

```
helm/ # helm values files
- ${app}.yaml # value overrides
- ${app}-defaults.yaml # default values we generate on install
- *.yaml{.liquid} # `.liquid` extension signifies the helm values file can be templated

bootstrap/ # setup for apps within your cluster fleet, this is the root service-of-services that bootstraps everything recursively

resources/ # additional third party setup manifests for common k8s add-on concerns like observability and policy enforcement.  Can be useful learning resources, but no default setup uses thse

terraform/
  - mgmt # module for setting up your management cluster
  - core-infra # Sets up base networking and dns.  Can also be used for similar cross-cutting infra concerns
  - modules
  - - clusters
  - - - {cloud} # we've crafted some reusable modules for setting up clusters on most major clouds, feel free to use these in stacks or wherever
  - ${app}/ - submodule for individual app's terraform

temp/ # a temp folder used during bootstrap that is gitignored
```

You're free to extend this as you'd like, although if you use the plural marketplace that structure will be expected.  You can also deploy services w/ manifests in other repos, this is meant to serve as a base to define the core infrastructure and get you started in a sane way.

## Using the Plural Catalog

Many of the common operations you'll need to do to manage your kubernetes infrastructure have all been operationalized as part of the service catalog that's synced via `bootstrap/catalogs.yaml`.  A decent example here would be setting up a new kubernetes fleet, which you can do with the following:

1. Go to {your-console-url}/self-service/catalogs, and click the `infra` catalog
2. Chose the `cluster-fleet-creator` pr automation, and fill out the needed values
3. Click create pr after filling out a decent branch name, the generated pr once merged should set up a dev and prod cluster in the networks defined by the core-infra stack we provision by default.

There are also other useful self-service setups in our catalog including:

* data infrastructure - sets up dagster, airbyte, mlflow
* security tooling - trivy operator, opa gatekeeper
* devops tools - elasticsearch log aggregation, victoriametrics based scale-out prometheus, grafana, etc.

## Add a workload cluster to your fleet

There are many ways to set up a workload cluster.  We've given you some baseline terraform to work from in the `terraform/modules/clusters` folders.  You can easily deploy these using stacks documented [here](https://docs.plural.sh/stacks/overview).

We've actually also set this up for you via a PR automation, which you can find at the `/pr/automations` url in your newly created console.  This will trigger a PR with the follownig resources:

* `InfrastructureStack` to create the underlying physical cluster
* `Cluster` to reference that cluster via CRD and enable future crds to point to it for `ServiceDeployment` and so forth.

If you chose to create a cluster using your own automation, adding a cluster can be done simply with the `plural` cli using:

```sh
plural cd clusters boottrap --name {name}
```

or with our terraform provider, which can easily be duplicated by looking at `terraform/modules/clusters/aws/plural.tf`

To reference it in other GitOps resources, add a `Cluster` CRD like:

```yaml
apiVersion: deployments.plural.sh/v1alpha1
kind: Cluster
metadata:
  name: <name>
spec:
  handle: <name> # must be set to reference the cluster
  tags:
    some: tag # if you want to add tags to the cluster
  metadata:
    arbitrary:
      yaml: metadata # any arbitrary metadata you might want to add for service templating (see https://docs.plural.sh/deployments/templating)
```

## Installing Low-Level K8s Operators

Plural provides a number of very useful tools for fleet-wide deployment. If you need to install operators like cert-manager or Istio, we'd recommend using our `GlobalService` resource.  You can find more documentation about [here](https://docs.plural.sh/deployments/operator/global-service).

Here's an example for deploying externaldns:

```yaml
apiVersion: deployments.plural.sh/v1alpha1
kind: GlobalService
metadata:
  name: externaldns
spec:
  tags:
    tier: dev # only target clusters with tier => dev tag pairs
  template:
    namespace: externaldns
    repositoryRef:
      kind: GitRepository
      name: infra
      namespace: infra
    git:
      ref: main
      folder: helm # or wherever else you want to store the helm values
    helm:
      version: 6.31.4
      chart: externaldns
      valuesFiles:
        - externaldns.yaml.liquid # use a liquid extension to enable templating in this file
      repository:
        namespace: infra
        name: externaldns
```

To see a number of working examples, look at your `bootstrap/o11y` or `bootstrap/network` folders, where we should install a few global services for common runtime-level kubernetes concerns.  If you want to reverse our default setup, simply delete them from the repo and push.
